`rustc_scalable_vector` (#3838)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/3838-repr-scalable.md

            // `svld1_f32` loads a vector register with the data from address
            // `a`, zeroing any elements in the vector that are masked out
            let sva = svld1_f32(pred, a);
            let svb = svld1_f32(pred, b);

            // `svadd_f32_m` adds `a` and `b`, any lanes that are masked out will
            // take the keep value of `a`
            let svc = svadd_f32_m(pred, sva, svb);

            // `svst1_f32` will store the result without accessing any memory
            // locations that are masked out
            svst1_f32(svc, pred, c);
        }
    }
}
```

From a user's perspective, writing code for scalable vectors isn't too different
from when writing code with a fixed sized vector.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

Types annotated with the `#[repr(simd)]` attribute contains either an array
field or multiple fields to indicate the intended size of the SIMD vector that
the type represents.

Similarly, a `scalable` repr is introduced to define a scalable vector type.
`scalable` accepts an integer to determine the minimum number of elements the

> vector contains. For example:

Reviewer: Wouldn't it be that the amount of elements in the vector needs to be a whole multiple of the scalable value? Otherwise `scalable(4)` would allow 5 elements, which would need to be represented as `<vscale x 1 x f32>` in LLVM rather than `<vscale x 4 x f32>`.

Author: I chatted with @RalfJung about this in Zulip previously, I've changed the description of these types so that hopefully it's a lot clearer.

I still propose manually specifying `N` but have a lot more justification for why I think this is the right choice - still happy to revisit that decision if it isn't a convincing argument.

Some of these limitations may be able to be lifted in future depending on what
is supported by rustc's codegen backends.

## ABI
[abi]: #abi

Rust currently always passes SIMD vectors on the stack to avoid ABI mismatches
between functions annotated with `target_feature` - where the relevant vector
register is guaranteed to be present - and those without - where the relevant
vector register might not be present.

However, this approach will not work for scalable vector types as the relevant
target feature must to be present to use the instruction that can allocate the
correct size on the stack for the scalable vector.

Therefore, there is an additional restriction that these types cannot be used in
the argument or return types of functions unless those functions are annotated
with the relevant target feature.

## Target features
[target-features]: #target-features

Similarly to the issues with the ABI of scalable vectors, without the relevant
target features, few operations can actually be performed on scalable vectors -
causing issues for the use of scalable vectors in generic code and with traits.
For example, implementations of traits like `Clone` would not be able to

> actually perform a clone, and generic functions that are instantiated with

Author: `repr(scalable)` types can be `Clone` and `Copy` and should be. This paragraph describes a problem that the types have that mean they can't trivially implement these traits without some compiler support, the solution is in the paragraph below - it's not an ideal solution and I've got ideas for how to do it better that I'm working on but I think that ends up being out-of-scope for the `repr(scalable)` RFC.

introducing value types with sizes that can only be known at runtime, requiring
significant changes to the language's notion of sizedness - this support is
being proposed in the [rfcs#3729].

Hardware is generally available with SVE, and key Rust stakeholders want to be
able to use these architecture features from Rust. In a [recent discussion on
SVE, Amanieu, co-lead of the library team, said][quote_amanieu]:

> I've talked with several people in Google, Huawei and Microsoft, all of whom
> have expressed a rather urgent desire for the ability to use SVE intrinsics in
> Rust code, especially now that SVE hardware is generally available.

Without support in the compiler, leveraging the
[*Hierarchy of Sized traits*][rfcs#3729] proposal, it is not possible to
introduce intrinsics and types exposing the scalable vector support in hardware.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

None of the infrastructure proposed in this RFC is intended to be used directly
by Rust users.

`repr(scalable)` as described later in
[*Reference-level explanation*][reference-level-explanation] is perma-unstable

> and exists only enables scalable vector types to be defined in the standard

Author: Fixed in 8709d8ca40eebf49a157f4e4d1bd1419bf1dc8e2

library. The specific vector types are intended to eventually be stabilised, but
none are proposed in this RFC.

## Using scalable vectors
[using-scalable-vectors]: #using-scalable-vectors

Scalable vector types correspond to vector registers in hardware with unknown
size at compile time. However, it will be a known and fixed size at runtime.
Additional properties could be known during compilation, depending on the
architecture, such as a minimum or maximum size or that the size must be a
multiple of some factor.

As previously described, users will not define their own scalable vector types
and instead use intrinsics from `std::arch`, and this RFC is not proposing any
such intrinsics, just the infrastructure. However, to illustrate how the types
and intrinsics that this infrastructure will enable can be used, consider the
following example that sums two input vectors:

```rust
fn sve_add(in_a: Vec<f32>, in_b: Vec<f32>, out_c: &mut Vec<f32>) {

>     let len = in_a.len();

Author: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3838#discussion_r2259898504

>     let len = in_a.len();

Author: Fixed in 2a7705a531d7fe4292b6cecfbadafd849750d323

    unsafe {
        // `svcntw` returns the actual number of elements that are in a 32-bit
        // element vector
        let step = svcntw() as usize;
        for i in (0..len).step_by(step) {
            let a = in_a.as_ptr().add(i);
            let b = in_b.as_ptr().add(i);
            let c = out_c as *mut f32;
            let c = c.add(i);

>             // `svwhilelt_b32` generates a mask based on comparing the current
>             // index against the `len`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            // `svwhilelt_b32` deals with the tail of the iteration: it generates a mask that
            // is enabled for the first `len` elements overall, but disables the last `len % step`
            // elements in the last iteration.
```
Is this correct? I am guessing here.

            let pred = svwhilelt_b32(i as _, len as _);

            // `svld1_f32` loads a vector register with the data from address

>             // `a`, zeroing any elements in the vector that are masked out

Author: They're never loaded if the elements are masked out, updated the comment in b96e2b7d7e0ca22f41676acaf1332f4d70574031

            let sva = svld1_f32(pred, a);
            let svb = svld1_f32(pred, b);

            // `svadd_f32_m` adds `a` and `b`, any lanes that are masked out will
            // take the keep value of `a`
            let svc = svadd_f32_m(pred, sva, svb);

            // `svst1_f32` will store the result without accessing any memory
            // locations that are masked out
            svst1_f32(svc, pred, c);
        }
    }
}
```

From a user's perspective, writing code for scalable vectors isn't too different
from when writing code with a fixed sized vector.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

Types annotated with the `#[repr(simd)]` attribute contains either an array

> field or multiple fields to indicate the intended size of the SIMD vector that

Author: No longer relevant as I don't frame this as an extension to `repr(simd)` anymore

the type represents.

Similarly, a `scalable(N)` representation is introduced to define a scalable
vector type. `scalable(N)` accepts an integer to determine the minimum number of

> elements the vector contains. For example:

Reviewer 3: We use `repr(C)` because otherwise some hypothetical CStruct repr type would have to be parameterized by every single arrangement of types, in an ordered fashion.

But `repr(simd)` does not pair with either `repr(packed)` or `repr(align(N))` coherently, and neither would `repr(scalable)`.

I do not think this should be handled by a new `repr`... modeling it on a still-unstable `repr(simd)`... which, as we have discovered over time with existing reprs, has a million footguns for how they work and get compiled. A lang item seems more to-the-point. I intend to make this true for `repr(simd)` as well anyways.

Author: I've changed this to not be a `repr` hint, instead a separate attribute, so there aren't any issues with overlap with other representation hints - f514a3ef7e9699d9065dd84c5b19a1e173d7b6c0.

```rust
#[repr(simd, scalable(4))]

> pub struct svfloat32_t { _ty: [f32], }

Reviewer 3: For example, this is misleading as this looks like it is unsized to begin with, but these are unconst `Sized`.

Author: I've changed the attribute to no longer be part of the `repr` attribute, and also changed the type of the type marker to no longer be an `!Sized` type, as these types will end up being non-const `Sized`.

```

As with the existing `repr(simd)`, `_ty` is purely a type marker, used to get
the element type for the codegen backend.

`svfloat32_t` is a scalable vector with a minimum of four `f32` elements and
potentially more depending on the length of the vector register at runtime.

## Choosing `N`
[choosing-n]: #choosing-n

Many intrinsics using scalable vectors accept both a predicate vector argument
and data vector arguments. Predicate vectors determine whether a lane is on or
off for the operation performed by any given intrinsic. Predicate vectors may
use different registers of sizes to the vectors containing data.
`repr(scalable)` is used to define vectors containing both data and predicates.

As `repr(scalable(N))` is intended to be a permanently unstable attribute, any
value of `N` is accepted by the attribute and it is the responsibility of
whomever is defining the type to provide a valid value. A correct value for `N`
depends on the purpose of the specific scalable vector type and the

> architecture.

Reviewer 3: This kind of abdication of responsibility in practice, when the rules are simply not that hard to work out, just leaves it harder to maintain the compiler in the future as it amounts to saying "We don't have to write down any reasoning about validity, not even in documentation, and we will allow someone in the future to discover why our decisions were fragile and sometimes incorrect without protecting them against more easily-induced miscompilations". I realize rust-lang has accepted this kind of reasoning in the past, but it sucks ass and amounts to pissing in the eyes of future maintainers once you can no longer ask the previous ones due to their inevitable burnout.

Author: I'd prefer if you engaged on this RFC without describing decisions you disagree with as  "sucks ass" or "pissing in the eyes of future maintainers". I'm open to discussing the details of this proposal and changing them, as with any proposal, but I'm much more open to that when concerns are phrased [like this concern was in Ralf's comment](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3838#discussion_r2205305466) rather than how you've chosen to phrase yours.

codegen backend:

- Cannot be stored in compound types (structs, enums, etc) 

    - Including coroutines, so these types cannot be held across an await
      boundary in async functions

    - `repr(transparent)` newtypes could be permitted with scalable vectors

- Cannot be used in arrays

- Cannot be the type of a static variable.

Some of these limitations may be able to be lifted in future depending on what
is supported by rustc's codegen backends.

## ABI
[abi]: #abi

Rust currently always passes SIMD vectors on the stack to avoid ABI mismatches
between functions annotated with `target_feature` - where the relevant vector
register is guaranteed to be present - and those without - where the relevant
vector register might not be present.

However, this approach will not work for scalable vector types as the relevant
target feature must to be present to use the instruction that can allocate the
correct size on the stack for the scalable vector.

Therefore, there is an additional restriction that these types cannot be used in
the argument or return types of functions unless those functions are annotated

> with the relevant target feature.

Reviewer 3: Would this not mean that these types cannot be used in function pointers, as we have no knowledge of the target features of a function pointer?

Reviewer 4: For the same reason it would also clash with dyn-compatible traits.

Reviewer 2: I think this is similar to the existing checks we have for `__m256` only being allowed in `extern "C"` functions when AVX is available. They can be used in function ptrs just fine, because someone somewhere must have made the unsafe promise that it is okay to call a `#[target_feature]` function since we actually do have the target feature.

Author: Clarified the function pointer point in c6d836de9fca7b4e739478141ffd3a1643fd1ec9 and dyn-compatibility in 530378cf66ce504c386f61001c682dbf199bd4e6.

## Target features
[target-features]: #target-features

Similarly to the issues with the ABI of scalable vectors, without the relevant
target features, few operations can actually be performed on scalable vectors -
causing issues for the use of scalable vectors in generic code and with traits.
For example, implementations of traits like `Clone` would not be able to
actually perform a clone, and generic functions that are instantiated with
scalable vectors would during instruction selection in the codegen backend.

When a scalable vector is instantiated into a generic function during
monomorphisation, or a trait method is being implemented for a scalable vector,

> then the relevant target feature will be added to the function.

Reviewer 4: Adding target features to functions based on the types being mentioned in them was also proposed for a different reason in https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3525 but that ran into all sorts of complications (I'm not sure off-hand which of these are relevant here).

Beyond the issues of that other RFC, what's proposed here isn't even visible in the function signature. So far the `unsafe` enforcement and manual safety reasoning for target features assumes it's clear which target features a function has, long before monomorphization. For example, consider this program:

```rust
// crate A
fn foo<T: Sized>() -> usize {
    size_of::<T>()
}

// crate B
use crate_a::foo;
fn main() {
    println!("vector size: {}", foo::<svfloat32_t>());
}
```

If the instantiation of `foo` gets the target feature, it needs to be unsafe to call. How can the compiler ensure this? And how is it surfaced to the programmer so they can write the correct `#[cfg]` or `is_aarch64_feature_detected!(...)` condition?

Reviewer 2: Adding target features depending on the concrete instantiation is fundamentally incompatible with how target features currently work in rustc. Of course the architecture can be changed, but it's a quite non-trivial change, and it has non-trivial ramifications: the MIR inliner crucially relies (for soundness) on knowing the target features of a function *without* knowing the concrete instance of the generics, so functions that are generic in their target feature risk serious perf regressions due the MIR inliner becoming less effective.

Reviewer 2: > When a scalable vector is instantiated into a generic function during
monomorphisation

It's also somewhat unclear what this means -- does instantiating `T` with `fn() -> svfloat32_t` also add the target feature? It pretty much has to, for soundness.

But then what about something like this
```rust
trait Tr { type Assoc; fn make() -> Self::Assoc }

fn foo<T: Tr>() {
  size_of_val(&T::make());
}
```
Now if I call `foo` with a type `T` such that `T::Assoc` is `svfloat32_t`, I *also* need the target feature:
```rust
impl Tr for i32 { type Assoc = svfloat32_t; ...}

foo::<i32>(); // oopsie, this must be unsafe
```

The target feature is needed any time `svfloat32_t` is in any way reachable via the given trait instance. This is not something the type system can even express, which also means I don't think it can possibly be sound.

`f32` elements and with SVE, `vscale` could then be any power of two which would
result in register sizes of 128, 256, 512, 1024 or 2048 and 4, 8, 16, 32, or 64
`f32` elements respectively.

The `N` in the `#[repr(scalable(N))]` determines the `element_count` used in the
LLVM type for a scalable vector.

While it is possible to change the vector length at runtime using a
[`prctl()`][prctl] call to the kernel, this would require that `vscale` change,
which is unsupported. `prctl` must only be used to set up the vector length for
child processes, not to change the vector length of the current process. As Rust
cannot prevent users from doing this, it will be documented as undefined
behaviour, consistent with C and C++.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

- `repr(scalable(N))` is inherently additional complexity to the language,
  despite being largely hidden from users.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

Without support for scalable vectors in the language and compiler, it is not
possible to leverage hardware with scalable vectors from Rust. As extensions
with scalable vectors are available in architectures as either the only or

> recommended way to do SIMD, lack of support in Rust would severely limit Rust's

Author: Fixed in 968ae3ed02e0bfa11db28378bbf8cf23e22d3928

can be in different and smaller registers than the data. For example,
`<vscale x 16 x i1>` could be the predicate vector for a `<vscale x 16 x u8>`
vector

For non-predicate scalable vectors, it will be typical that `N` will be
`$minimum_register_length / $type_size` (e.g. `4` for `f32` or `8` for `f16`
with a minimum 128-bit register length). In this circumstance, `N` could be
trivially calculated by the compiler.

For predicate vectors, it is desirable to be able to to define types where `N`
matches the number of elements in the non-predicate vector, i.e. a
`<vscale x 4 x i1>` to match a `<vscale x 4 x f32>`, `<vscale x 8 x i1>` to
match `<vscale x 8 x u16>`, or `<vscale x 16 x i1>` to match
`<vscale x 16 x u8>`. In this circumstance, it might still be possible to give
rustc all of the relevant information such that it could compute `N`, but it
would add extra complexity.

This RFC takes the position that the additional complexity required to have the
compiler always be able to calculate `N` isn't justified given the permanently
unstable nature of the `repr(scalable(N))` attribute and the scalable vector
types defined in `std::arch` are likely to be few in number, automatically

> generated and well-tested.

Author: I'd like that too but it's not something I'm trying to enable in this RFC, I just want to lay the groundwork for vendor intrinsics for scalable vectors, how to make these work with Portable SIMD is better as a follow-up

  incomplete types to represent scalable vectors. However, sizeless types are
  not part of the C specification and Arm's C Language Extensions (ACLE) provide
  [an edit to the C standard][acle_sizeless] which formally define "sizeless
  types".
- [.NET 9 has experimental support for SVE][dotnet], but as a managed language,
  the design and implementation considerations in .NET are quite different to
  Rust.

[rfcs#3268] was a previous iteration of this RFC.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

There are currently no unresolved questions.

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

There are a handful of future possibilities enabled by this RFC:

## General mechanism for target-feature-affected types
[general-mechanism-target-feature-types]: #general-mechanism-for-target-feature-affected-types

A more general mechanism for enforcing that SIMD types are only used in
`target_feature`-annotated functions would be useful, as this would enable SVE
types to have fewer distinct restrictions than other SIMD types, and would
enable SIMD vectors to be passed by-register, a performance improvement.

> Such a mechanism would need be introduced gradually to existing SIMD types with

Author: Fixed in 8709d8ca40eebf49a157f4e4d1bd1419bf1dc8e2
